(electronic music)
(keyboard clacking)
So, over the last few videos,
we looked at a strategy for dealing with collisions
called linear probing.
In this video, we're going to look at the second strategy
for dealing with collisions
and it's called chaining
and it's a lot simpler than linear probing.
When we use chaining,
instead of storing the value directly
into the array, each array position
contains a linked list.
And so, for our example, instead of storing the employees
or StoredEmployee instances,
we would store a linked list
and if we go to add an employee
and the key that we use has a hashed value
that collides with the hashed value for another key,
well, that's okay, because at that position
in the array, there's a linked list
and linked lists don't have any boundaries.
They're not bounded by size
and so, we can just go ahead
and add that second employee into the linked list
at that array position.
So, we never have the concept
of oops, sorry, this array position is already filled
and so, we don't have to worry about incrementing indices
and all that stuff.
Now, of course the drawback is there's a linked list
at every position
and so, when you go to retrieve,
or delete an item, you have to search the linked list
to find the item with the key you're interested in
but if you have a good hashing function
and if you have a good load factor,
then these linked lists will typically be short.
So, let's jump right into the implementation.
I've created a new project,
I've copied over the code from the last project,
some of it, I don't have the last retrieve that we did.
I've got our StoredEmployee
because this will be what we store in the linked list
because we are gonna have to search the linked list
for the key that we're interested in.
I have the usual employee class
and I've created a class called ChainedHashtable
and I've copied over our hashing function
because we're gonna use the same hashing function.
I mean, the hashing function still has to produce
an array index.
The only difference here is that a linked list
will be at that array index.
So, we're gonna need one field
and that's our hashtable,
so we're gonna say private LinkedList,
we'll just use the LinkedList class in the JDK
and it's gonna be a LinkedList of StoredEmployee
and we want an array of LinkedList
and we'll call it hashtable.
And so, in our constructor,
we need to create our hashtable,
so I'll say public ChainedHashtable
and we'll say hashtable equals new LinkedList
and we want 10 elements.
And then we have to initialise each array position
with a linked list, an empty linked list.
So, we're gonna say for int i equals zero,
i less than hashtable.length,
i++ and so, we're gonna say hashtable i
equals new LinkedList StoredEmployee.
And that's it.
So, we create our hashtable,
it's an array of length 10
except instead of being a StoredEmployee array,
it's gonna contain LinkedLink
and then we have to of course create an instance
of LinkedList in every position.
We could do this on the add method.
We could check and see is there a LinkedList there?
But doing it up front just simplifies things.
The other way we could potentially implement this
and you might see this if you look at other implementations
is that we create an object array
and then we store either a StoredEmployee
if there's only one item or once we get a collision,
we then change that to a LinkedList
but I think just starting out with LinkedLink
is a lot simpler.
So, let's go ahead and add the put method.
And so, we'll say public void put
and we need as usual the key value pair,
so we'll say String key and Employee value,
we'll just call it employee like we did in the other videos.
And the first thing we're gonna do as usual
is hash the key, so we'll say int hashedKey
equals hashKey key
and now all we have to do is add the employee
to the LinkedList that's at the position hashedKey,
so we'll say hashtable, hashedKey.add
because there's a LinkedList at each index
and we'll say new StoredEmployee
and we'll pass the key and then the employee
and that's it.
So much simpler
and it doesn't matter here
whether we add employees to the beginning or the end
of the list 'cause we have no idea
in what order they're gonna be retrieved,
so it'll be a six of one, half a dozen of the other type
of thing and so, as you can see, it's much, much simpler.
We don't have to worry
about is the position already occupied
and if it is, keep incrementing indices
and keep a watch out for traversing
the entire array et cetera.
It's much, much simpler
but it does require more memory
because you have the next and previous fields.
So, let's implement get now.
And so, we'll say public Employee
'cause we're gonna return the employee get
and we need the key
and we'll say int hashedKey
equals hashKey, the key
and now what we need to do is search the LinkedList
at position hashedKey for the StoredEmployee
that matches this key
and so, we're gonna use a list iterator to do that.
So, I'll say ListIterator
and it's gonna be an iterator of StoredEmployee
'cause that's what we have stored in our list.
Iterator equals hashtable hashedKey.listIterator.
And now we're gonna use this iterator
to find the employee that has our key.
So, we'll say StoredEmployee employee
equals null and then we'll say while iterator.hasNext.
We'll set the employee to the interator.next
and then we'll say if
employee.key.equals
the key we're looking for,
then we have found our employee
and so, we're just gonna return emloyee.employee
and we're done.
Now, if we drop out of this loop,
it means that we've iterated over the entire list
and we have not found a StoredEmployee instance
that matches the key
and so, we're just gonna go ahead and return null
and that's our get method.
It's quite straightforward.
A lot easier to write than using linear probing.
So, finally, let's add our remove method.
So, I'll say public Employee remove
and we need the key
and I'm gonna copy this code here
because it's quite similar.
So, we're gonna start out by getting the hashedKey.
We're gonna get the iterator just like we did before,
set a StoredEmployee to null
and iterate over the employees
but instead of returning here, we're just gonna break.
And so, when we break out of the loop,
there's two possibilities.
We have completely traversed the list
and we haven't found a StoredEmployee instance
that matches or the StoredEmployee employee field
now contains the employee we're interested in,
so we'll say if employee equals null,
this means that we've traversed the entire list
and we didn't find the employee we're looking for,
so we'll return null.
Else we did find the employee we're looking for,
so we wanna remove it from the list.
So, we'll say hashtable, hashedKey.remove employee
and we'll return the employee.employee.
Remember that this employee local field
is actually a stored employee
and we don't need this return null.
And that works and we could probably pull this out
and refactor it so that this is in a separate method
but we can improve this remove method
because the way we're doing it now,
we're actually gonna end up iterating over the list twice
because we're iterating over it here
to find the employee
that has the key and then when we call the remove method
with the object,
the remove method in the LinkedList class
is gonna have to iterate over the list again
to find this object
because remember, in a linked list,
we've only got for the JDK linked list,
we only have the head and the tail of the list
and we're not asking to remove from the head
or the tail, we're saying remove this random employee
that you have in the list
and the way that the list has to do that
is to traverse the list.
We already did that here.
And so, we're gonna change this code
to keep track of where we are in the list
and then there's another form
of the remove method where we can pass an index,
so we can say delete employee five in the list
and depending on how the list is implemented in the backend,
that can be faster.
It may still have to traverse the list
but at least it's not gonna have to do
all the comparisons again
because with this one, it has to traverse the list
and for every list element,
it has to say is this employee I'm looking for?
Is this the employee I'm looking for et cetera,
whereas if we just say remove the guy,
it's the fifth guy on the list,
it may have to move to the fifth guy on the list
but then it can just delete it
and it doesn't have to keep comparing along the way,
so it would be faster.
So, up here I'm gonna say int index equals zero
and then every time we pull something off the iterator,
I'll increment that index
and then here we'll say remove
and we're going to pass the index instead.
And so, that's just a little performance improvement
and because we're doing that here,
I won't pull out anything from here
because we are needing to do something different
in the remove.
And that's it.
That's our remove.
Using LinkedList makes the implementation easier
because there's always room at the hashed location
but that doesn't mean that chaining is better
than linear probing.
In fact, on average, linear programming performs better
than chaining does.
It just means that the implementation
is a little bit simpler.
So, one final thing
is to implement our printHashtable,
so we'll say public void printHashtable
and what we're gonna have to do here
is traverse the linked lists at every position,
so we're gonna say for int i equals zero,
i less than hashtable.length i++
and we'll say if hashtable i is empty,
we don't wanna traverse an empty LinkedList,
then we'll just System.out.print line
position
plus i plus colon space
empty.
Now if the LinkedList is not empty,
then we need to traverse the list,
so once again, we'll use a list iterator,
so I'll start out by saying Position,
basically this, let me just copy this, it'll be faster.
Except I'll remove the empty at the end.
And then we're gonna get a ListIterator
like we did before, a ListIterator StoredEmployee iterator
equals hashtable i.listIterator,
and then while iterator.hasNext
we want to print the employee field
and this StoredEmployee.
So, we'll say System.out.
I'm going to change this up here to print,
so I'm gonna say System.out.print iterator.next.employee.
And then we'll print an arrow here.
System.out.print.
I'll make a single arrow even though we've learned
that the JDK LinkedList is actually a doubly linked list
and then when we drop out there,
I'll do the System.out.print line
and I'll say null because the end of each list
will point to null and that's it
for our printHashtable
and that's it for our implementation.
So, let's go back to our main method
and now everything compiled,
so I guess I never did need Bill.
I'll remove him from this file.
And so, we created a ChainedHashtable,
we add four employees and we print the hashtable
and then we get Smith
and then we remove Doe
and Jones and we print the hashtable again.
So, let's do this step by step.
So, I'll comment this out.
Let's run.
So, here's our hashtable.
We'll see as usual the first three positions are empty,
John Doe is in position three
and this time, when we get a collision,
we'll see that we have a LinkedList at position five.
This is a LinkedList as well
but we have a LinkedList with more than one employee on it,
so at position five we have Jane
and then we have Mary.
So, when we were using linear probing,
we kept looking for an empty spot
and Mary got put into position seven
but now there's always room at the hashed value
for the key and so, we've added Mary into the list
and we have two items at the list
and Mike is at position six as usual.
So, now let's try out our retrieval
to make sure that works.
So, we're gonna get Mary,
so what's gonna happen is we're gonna come in
and we're gonna search this LinkedList
for an employee that was added with the key Smith.
And here we go.
We got Mary Smith
and finally let's try to remove some items
and I'll comment out this printHashtable
so it's not getting in the way.
And we're getting an exception,
so we'll have to check why that's happening
and it's happening in the remove,
so let's go to the remove
and it's happening here.
What's happening here is we're getting an out of bounds
and I can see why.
It's because the first item on the list
is at position zero, the second item is at position one,
the third item is at position two et cetera.
But in here, we're coming in
and I've initialised index to zero
and then we pull off the first item
and we increment the index to one
when really index should still be zero
because we've only looked at one item
and so, when we look at the first item,
index should be zero.
When we look at the second item,
index should be one, et cetera,
so I'm gonna change this to negative one
so that when we come in here,
we increment to zero
and if we've looked at the entire array
and we don't find anything,
then the employee will be null,
so we're not gonna try to remove anything.
If the list is empty,
employee will be null,
so we're not gonna try to remove anything.
And so, that should work okay.
So, let me pull this down
and let's try running again and cross our fingers.
We're now not gonna get an exception.
And we don't.
Back in the main method,
we removed John Doe, so he's gone from position three
and we removed Jane Jones
and she's now been taken off the list at position five
and we just have Mary there
and then finally, let's try to retrieve Mary
because remember, with the linear probing,
before we added the code to rehash the table
on a remove, once we had removed Jane,
we couldn't find Mary
but we won't have the same problem
with chaining, so let's add Mary and let's run
and we can still see Mary.
So, that's chaining.
It's a lot simpler to implement
than linear probing but as I said,
that doesn't mean that linear probing
is worse than chaining,
it just means that you have more code to write,
the implementation's a little bit more complex.
So, what do you think the time complexity
of retrieving an item based on a key is
when we use chaining?
In the worst case, all the instances
would have the same hashed value
and so, let's say you had this really bad hashing function
and it didn't matter what you gave it
every single key hashed to the value three.
That means that every single item
is going to be put into the linked list
at position three
and so, when you wanna retrieve something,
you potentially have to traverse
every single item in the hashtable.
And so, the worst case for chaining is linear time
when you go to retrieve something.
But the key here, no pun intending,
is the hashing algorithm.
We want a hashing function that will result
in the smallest number of collisions.
Now of course, the best case is no collisions at all
but that can be difficult to achieve in practise
but in the average case,
let's assume that we have a decent hashing function,
then your linked lists aren't going to be that long
and so, if we say that k is the average length
of a linked list in your hashtable,
then retrieval will be O of one plus k.
The one corresponds to calculating the hashed value
and going to that array position
and the k provides us with an idea
of the average length of a linked list.
And so, whether the time complexity
is going to be closer to constant time or linear time
will depend on the hashing function
and also on the load factor.
Now why does it depend on the load factor in this case?
Well, if you're trying to squeeze 100 values
into an array of 10,
you're going to have a much fuller array
in terms of linked lists that are actually having values
than if you try to squeeze 100 items into an array
of size 50 because remember,
in the hashing function,
if we go back to ChainedHashtable,
we're always dividing by the hashtable.length,
so if this gets bigger,
your values will be more uniformly distributed.
For example, when our array is of length 10,
the numbers five and 15 are both going to go
into position five.
But if we doubled that array to length 20,
five would go into position five
but 15 would go into position 15
and if we made that 30 and 40 and 50,
then if we were storing higher values,
they'd be more evenly distributed.
And so, as I've said before,
and it's important to understand the hashing function
and the load factor are going to be important
in determining how well your hashtable performs.
Anyway, now that we've looked at chaining
and linear probing, we can see why having a hashing function
that doesn't produce lots of collisions
will result in better performance.
Okay, so one final note before we go.
In our hashing function, we're using the key.length.
Now, we could be calling the hash code method
in the string class and so, I'm gonna comment this out
'cause this is often how you'll do it.
You'll actually call the hash code method in the class.
I didn't do this 'cause I wanted us to focus
on the rest of the implementation
but now that we understand and we've seen everything,
let's use the strings hash code method
rather than just using the key.length,
so I'll say return
and I'm gonna say Math.absolute value
because the hash code method for string
can actually produce negative numbers
and so, we have to take the absolute value
and we're gonna say key.hashCode
and we're gonna mod that by hashtable.length.
In a hashing function,
you're always gonna be modding it
by the size of the array because you have to make sure
that the values you're returning
are valid array indices.
And so, I'm gonna comment out all these guys here
that are removing stuff from the hashtable
but I will uncomment this printHashtable
and let's run again
and see how this changes things.
And you'll see that our employees
are now distributed differently.
John Doe and Mike Wilson now hash to a value of zero.
Jones hashes to a value of one
and Smith hashes to a value of seven.
Now we're getting collisions here
because we have such a tiny array.
If we had a larger array,
it's possible that we wouldn't be getting
any collisions at all.
And so, that's it for hashtables.
In the next video, we're going to take a look
at what's available in the JDK.
I'll see you there.